Problem 7. Clique Dynamics of Whitney triangulations
(suggested by Anna Margarethe Limbach)
Source: Proposed by F. Larrión, V. Neumann-Lara, and M. A.
Pizaña in 2002 [4].
Definitions.
• Given a graph G, its clique graph kG is the intersection graph
of its maximal complete subgraphs, called cliques. This means the
set of cliques of G is the vertex set of kG, and two vertices of kG
are adjacent if and only if they intersect non-trivially as cliques.
The operator k that maps each graph to its clique graph is called the
clique graph operator, and one can apply it iteratively to generate
the sequence of iterated clique graphs k
0G = G, k
1G = kG, k
2G =
k(kG), k
3G, . . ..
• If the sequence of iterated clique graphs of a graph G consists of
pairwise non-isomorphic graphs, G is called k-divergent, otherwise,
k-convergent, and if it contains the graph that consists of a singleton
(and then becomes stationary there) G is called k-null.
• A graph is called locally cyclic, if each open neighbourhood of a
vertex induces a cycle.
• A Whitney-triangulation of a compact surface is a triangulation
such that each triangle of its underlying graph is a face of the
surface. Whitney triangulations of closed surfaces are locally cyclic
with minimum degree ≥ 3 and the only one with minimum degree 3
is the K4 that triangulates the sphere.
From another perspective one can start with such a locally cyclic
graph and obtain a closed surface by “filling in the triangles”.

Question
Is the underlying graph of a finite Whitney triangulation of
the disk always k-null?



11
Related results:
• The K4 is k-null.
• The octahedron graph is k-divergent.
• The icosahedron graph is k-divergent.
• All locally cyclic graphs with minimum degree ≥ 7 are k-convergent.
• Every closed surface admits a k-divergent Whitney triangulation.
• Every closed surface with negative Euler characteristic admits a
k-convergent Whitney triangulation.
• Every Whitney triangulation of the disk such that every interior
vertex has degree ≥ 6 is k-null.