{
  "summary_md": "This round develops the missing normalization and non-conflict ingredients needed to finish the localized round-elimination lower bound for Online-LOCAL(t) on bounded-degree trees. Main contributions: (1) Lemma NE (Normalization-and-Extension around an edge) formalizes that any normalized local arrival schedule inside B(e,2t) can be realized by a global schedule and that outside arrivals can be pushed past the decisive moment without affecting B(e,t). (2) A sharp “+1” minimality counterexample shows K = 2t+2W+1 is necessary for quiescent batching. (3) The node→edge elimination is reworked into a universal, set-valued step (LB.1u) that defines S_e(β) by universal quantification over normalized local schedules; non-conflict is then immediate. An alternative decisive-edge semantics (LB.1e) yields uniqueness and an existential reduction. Iterating the universal elimination 2t times gives a 0-round set-labeling that should contradict the ID-graph property (LB.2). Next steps are to formalize the symmetric edge→node half-step, finish the quantified proofs, and integrate everything into output.md. Citations: prover-01.out.json, prover-02.out.json.",
  "highlights": [
    "Lemma NE: precise normalization-and-extension around an edge — normalized local schedules on B(e,2t) extend to global schedules and outside arrivals can be swapped/pushed past the decisive step (uses Lemma 7/2t-commutativity).",
    "Minimality +1: K = 2t+2W+1 is necessary for (W,t)-quiescent batching; a path example (W=0,t=1) demonstrates immediate one-edge coupling if +1 is omitted.",
    "Universal node→edge elimination (LB.1u): define S_e(β) as the set of orientations universally forced by all normalized local schedules consistent with boundary snapshot β; avoids the earlier double-witness pitfall.",
    "Edge-decided semantics / LB.1e: if orientation is fixed at the second-endpoint arrival, uniqueness (dependence only on B(e,2t)) can be argued and yields an existential node→edge reduction.",
    "Non-conflict is immediate in the universal formulation: both directions cannot be universally forced under the same β. Sets remain non-empty and local 'no-sink in sets' constraints are preserved.",
    "Iteration plan (LB.2): alternate node↔edge universal half-steps 2t times to obtain a 0-round edge-centered set-labeling; this should violate the ID-graph condition and complete the lower bound."
  ],
  "next_questions": [
    "Formalize and prove the symmetric edge→node universal half-step: state exact radii (radius descent by 1/2 each half-step), show preservation of nonemptiness and the local node constraints, and prove universality composes under iteration.",
    "Write the fully quantified proof of Lemma NE (include the precise definition of the 'decisive step' for an edge, the iterative swapping argument, and the t=1 illustrative subcase) and insert it into output.md.",
    "Complete LB.2: define the inductive family S^{(k)}, prove the invariant that universality/nonemptiness and 'no-sink in sets' are preserved, and formalize the final ID-graph contradiction (or give the decisive-edge uniqueness alternative where convenient)."
  ]
}