{"feedback_md":"High-level: You both attack the remaining gap (the unrestricted Online-LOCAL(t) case on trees) via a localized round-elimination for sinkless orientation. The two main ingredients you propose are (i) a normalization-and-extension lemma around an edge, and (ii) a universal set-valued node→edge step that avoids the earlier “double-grab” flaw. These are promising directions conceptually, but the current formulations still lean on a normalization that is not valid in the unrestricted online model, and on a boundary-freezing assumption that is not justified. Below I detail the issues and concrete next steps.\n\n1) Lemma NE (edge-normalization and extension):\n- The extension part (“given any local prefix τ inside B(e,2t), we can realize it globally by listing τ first and postponing all outside vertices”) is correct and essentially trivial; it does not need Lemma 7.\n- The “moreover” normalization claim is not valid as stated. You attempt to push all pre-decision arrivals outside B(e,2t) after the decisive moment by repeatedly swapping adjacent arrivals that are at distance > 2t. This confuses “distance to e” with “pairwise distance between the swapped vertices.” A vertex x with dist(x,e) > 2t can be within distance ≤ 2t of many vertices inside B(e,2t); such pairs cannot be swapped by Lemma 7. Worse, in general outside arrivals can influence B(e,t) before the second endpoint arrives via chains of internal arrivals, and there is no way to normalize them away while preserving the B(e,t) state. A concrete t=1 path counterexample is sketched in the notes below.\n\n2) Universal set-valued elimination (LB.1u) and edge-decided semantics:\n- Switching to edge-decided semantics does fix the logical non-conflict (“both endpoints force opposite directions”), but all your definitions of boundary snapshots and “normalized local schedules” implicitly freeze or externalize the boundary ∂B. In the unrestricted online model, boundary nodes (already arrived) may change state during many pre-decision windows; their states at the decisive moment depend on outside arrivals, and local executions inside B(e,2t) need not preserve the boundary. Without a valid normalization that severs outside influence on B(e,t) up to the decisive moment, the universal quantification over internal schedules is not an accurate abstraction of all global schedules; it over-approximates the feasible orientations and breaks the link to the original algorithm.\n- The claimed t→t−1/2 “radius drop” is asserted but not established in the online setting, which has unbounded pre-history. Classical round-elimination relies on finite type spaces induced by t-round LOCAL views; here, the boundary state space is unbounded unless you assume output-only, quiescence, finite-state, or ID-obliviousness. This must be addressed explicitly.\n\n3) “+1” minimality for quiescent batching:\n- The motivation is correct: forbidding even a single cross-edge between distinct active regions is the safe condition that makes the phase-independence proof go through. Your current proof sketch for t=1 uses a two-round coupling, which mismatches t=1. The existing remark in output.md already states the necessity; if we want a formal tightness example, we should present it for t≥2 (or for W>0), where one-hop cross-region coupling can be forwarded within the t rounds.\n\nActionable next steps:\n- Repair Lemma NE: keep only the (true) extension/prefix-realization part. Remove or restate the normalization direction; it is false in general. Add a counterexample to notes to prevent re-introduction of this assumption.\n- If you want an elimination scheme, constrain the model: (a) output-only; (b) (W,t)-quiescent; or (c) finite-state and ID-oblivious. In these regimes, one can hope to bound the relevant boundary information and make a set-valued round-elimination provable. Without such constraints, the state space at ∂B is unbounded and the universal-step abstraction is not sound.\n- If you keep aiming for the unrestricted model, you must replace the “boundary snapshot” by an object that fully captures all outside influence that can reach B(e,t) by the decisive moment (which is unbounded a priori). Either prove a nontrivial compaction lemma that finitely summarizes that influence, or accept that the round-elimination route will not close.\n- Optional: turn the “+1 is necessary” remark into a formal proposition with a clean t=2,W=0 path example, or leave it as is; the current remark is already correct in spirit.\n\nBottom line: The conceptual fixes (edge-decided semantics; universal sets) are in the right direction, but the crucial normalization step is still unsupported (and in its current form, false). Please retool the elimination within a model where boundary influence can be finitely captured, or provide a rigorous compaction argument. Meanwhile, we can safely archive only the extension half of Lemma NE (if you think it is worth recording), and keep the rest in notes until a correct normalization is established.","new_notes_md":"Critical audit: normalization around an edge and boundary freezing\n\n- Edge-prefix extension (valid). For any edge e=uv and any finite arrival prefix τ consisting of distinct vertices of B(e,2t), there is a global arrival order σ whose first |τ| arrivals are exactly τ, and no vertex outside B(e,2t) arrives before those steps. Running A on σ and on the induced local execution confined to the arrived subgraph inside B(e,2t) produces identical states/outputs on B(e,t) at each of those |τ| steps. This is immediate from the model: outside vertices are simply absent.\n\n- The converse normalization (invalid). It is not generally possible to transform an arbitrary global schedule into one in which no vertex outside B(e,2t) arrives before the decisive moment for e while preserving the state on B(e,t) step-by-step (or even at the decisive moment). The obstruction is that outside arrivals at distance > 2t from e can influence B(e,t) before the second endpoint arrives via chains of arrivals inside B(e,2t), and Lemma 7 (2t-commutativity) allows swaps only for pairs of arrivals at pairwise distance > 2t.\n\nCounterexample (t = 1 on a path). Let the path be … x3 – x2 – x1 – u – v – y1 – y2 – y3 … with e = uv. Consider an Online-LOCAL(1) algorithm A that maintains at each arrived node a persistent bit s (initially 0). Upon an arrival of w, in the single LOCAL round each already-arrived node sends its current s to arrived neighbors; the new node w sets its own s to the parity of the s-values it receives (or 0 if it has no arrived neighbor). Now take the arrival order: x3 (outside B(e,2)), x2, x1, u (first endpoint), v (second endpoint). When x2 arrives, it sets s(x2) based on s(x3); then x1 sets s(x1) based on s(x2); by the time v arrives, s(x1) depends on x3’s early arrival, and the state on B(e,1) at the decisive moment reflects that influence. One cannot push x3 past v by a sequence of swaps allowed by Lemma 7 without encountering swaps with x2 or x1, which are at distance ≤ 2t from x3. Thus the “moreover” normalization fails even on a path.\n\nImplication for elimination. Any node→edge elimination step that freezes a boundary ∂B around e and then quantifies over local schedules inside B must justify why the boundary states are fixed and unaffected by outside arrivals up to the decisive time. In the unrestricted online model, boundary nodes may change state many times before e is decided, driven by outside arrivals; there is no general way to ignore or freeze that evolution. Consequently, the proposed universal set-valued rule that depends only on B(e,2t) and a fixed boundary snapshot is not yet sound.\n\nOn finite type spaces. Classical round-elimination relies on a finite set of local types induced by t-round views. Here, without restrictions (output-only, quiescence, finite-state, ID-obliviousness), the set of possible boundary states at distance 2t is unbounded. Any lower-bound scheme must either (i) prove a compaction lemma that only finitely many boundary features can influence the decision at e, or (ii) work within a restricted model where such a bound is immediate.\n\nOn the “+1” in K for quiescent batching. The rationale remains correct: to forbid any within-phase signal that leaves one active region and re-enters another, we must ensure there is no single cross-edge between distinct active regions. For W=0, R_v=B(v,t); for general W, R_v=B(v,W+t). A proper coloring of G^{2t+2W+1} guarantees dist(R_v,R_w) ≥ 2 for same-color v≠w, which is exactly what Claim 8.1 uses.\n\nNext steps.\n- Keep only the safe edge-prefix extension fact; drop the converse normalization from any formal statements.\n- If pursuing elimination, restrict the model to obtain finite boundary types (output-only, (W,t)-quiescent, or finite-state/ID-oblivious), and then formalize universal-set node↔edge steps, including exact radius accounting, preservation of nonemptiness, and node constraints.\n- Alternatively, attempt a compaction lemma in the unrestricted model: prove that for sinkless orientation on trees, the orientation at e at the decisive moment depends only on a finite equivalence class of the evolving boundary at radius 2t. If this fails, document a counterexample LCL.\n- Optionally, provide a formal tightness example for the +1 in Lemma 8 with t≥2 on paths to complement the existing remark.","new_notes_append":"True","new_outputs_md":"","new_outputs_append":"True","verdict":"nothing so far"}